as of this week July 2018 it has been
one year since the death of this woman
Miriam as Connie
Mary MERS Carney as you probably know
was the first woman ever to win the
Fields Medal the Nobel Prize of
mathematics actually it's a bit harder
to win than a new bell Prize it's a bit
more stringent conditions but in any
case this was a very important moment
for the mathematical community in my
opinion and Miriam died of breast cancer
one year ago three years after this
video after receiving the award and so I
thought I'd take the opportunity to talk
a little bit about some of the cool
things that she discovered and these
funny things that she studied so here we
go three four things that you didn't
know about Miriam Erza Connie so thing
number one
Miriam was not just the first woman to
win the Fields Medal she was the first
Iranian and she was the first Muslim so
yeah Miriam grew up in Iran
she Victor meant meant a lot to the
Iranian community and there's a very
touching tribute to her in Farsi by this
guy former colleague she also became the
first woman ever to be shown in the
Iranian media without a headscarf on so
what happened was that this guy the
President of Iran tweeted a picture of
her when she won the prize without a
headscarf previously the media had been
completely relying on images this pretty
pretty much this image of her she
actually just stopped wearing a
headscarf towards the end of her life
and in some cases the media would
Photoshop a headscarf on two pictures of
her chiz very unpleasant but yes after
he tweeted the picture there at us okay
it's legal it's it's it's not breaking
that much for Tabua anymore for us to
show her the way that she lived
unfortunately also due to being a Muslim
while parents being Muslims they almost
missed her funeral because of being
unable to travel to the United States
due to the executive order you can see
being held here very unfortunate
so but thing number two her discoveries
have applications to understanding the
Big Bang
so probably you've heard of string
theory or maybe M theory
M theory is what this guy Stephen
Hawking will tell you is the well what
he would have told you is humanity's
best hope for understanding the Big Bang
M theory was created by this guy ed
Witten I certainly don't understand M
theory but I know that it's about
weirdly shaped surfaces moving around in
weirdly shaped spaces and maramures
akane stuff is certainly very useful for
studying those so we've got a weird
surface here we're going to think for a
second though about a very simple
surface here we have a flat plane and we
are going to imagine putting an insect
somewhere on this plane and pointing it
in some direction and this insect is
very dumb it has no ability to do
anything but go straight forward
following the surface that it's on and
creating a straight line if you bring in
a more complex surface just this sphere
here for example then this insect will
go around and create a geodesic in this
case well it or is the definition of a
geodesic is that it's this path that an
insect would take so a straight line is
a closed geodesic it is a straight line
as a geodesic on a flat surface on a
sphere a circle is a geodesic and a
closed geodesic is one that wraps back
on itself like that on a plane there
no clothes g.od six on a sphere there
are no g.od six that are not closed but
things get a bit more complicated
significantly more complicated when
you're talking about a funky surface
like this one let's have a smaller step
up again though here we have a donut and
if we point this insect in a random
direction now this this is again a
geodesic and it might close up on itself
let's have a look in this case we might
get a little bit lucky or it just missed
I might be able to get it to close up if
I'm very careful about where I put it
so let's put it here your aim has to be
incredible with this no that's not going
to close up very close oh well no closed
geodesic for us on the doughnut but
Marian Mirza carnie every once in a
while this insect does manage to close
up especially if I can get it doing a
nice simple one but maramures Akane
she studied not just one surface but the
set of all possible surfaces with
certain features and in particular she
can tell you if you give her that she's
got a formula if you give her formula
the number of holes in your surface then
it will tell you the problem y Allah
will tell you the probability that a
random simple geodesic will close up in
the case of this surface for example the
probability I don't know whether this
one will be an example but the problem I
can tell you that the probability that a
random geodesic random point and
direction to go in for this insect
probability little close up is one in
seven thing oh and by the way that will
research all has applications to boring
useful stuff like understanding paint on
a car and processing geometry for like
3d animation
okay thing number three maramures akane
technically once won a prize worth
infinity dollars so this is impressive
what did she do it oh well it's a fun
story from her childhood it led to her
first publication she was a very gifted
kid they she was the first woman she was
the first woman person of any gender to
get full marks and the maths Olympiad
and she was given a very difficult
puzzle which was find a graph and this
is a graph this is a graph this is a
graph find a graph which is a set of
points connected up with lines that has
certain features they said you'll this
is pretty hard to find a graph of this
kind will give you a dollar for every
graph of this kind that you can find
here are some of the ones that she found
will give you a dollar for every graph
this kind but she actually ended up
generating a formula that could give you
an infinite number of graphs of the type
that she was looking for so yeah that's
the kind of thing that she'll do what
was she looking for specifically so we
can take a graph and we can complete it
here's another random graph and we can
complete that as well what does it mean
to complete a graph it means to connect
every single point to every single other
point she wasn't just looking at
complete graphs though she was looking
at things called complete tripartite
graphs so these both are complete
tripartite as you can see you've got
many many connections in these two
graphs and in particular but in
particular every graph is can every
point is connected to every single other
point with the exception of points that
are in these three groups so no point in
this group of three is connected to any
point in the any other point in this
group of three but they're all connected
to the other point
it's in this in this graph if I were to
draw a line between these two points
then we would see that then it would not
be a tripartite graph anymore but yeah
anyway so tripartite graphs the puzzle
is can you decompose them that means
divide them up into other graphs such
that they're the other graphs have
they're the edges of the original graph
in five cycles so what is a cycle first
let's bring in one of these things a
cycle is when you have a series of edges
that you can just sort of loop back on
one another so apparently Miriam as
Connie likes loops let's have another
example if I connect up these two then
these three edges here form a cycle
that's a three cycle a five cycle is a
cycle of length five so we've got one
two three four five edges in there five
edges in there five edges in there all
cycles some tripartite graphs can be
decomposed into five cycles some can't
it is very difficult to work out whether
a tripartite graph can be decomposed as
I found when I try to write an algorithm
that did this and yeah my computer
crashed because yeah I had given it an
algorithm that would take until the end
of the universe possibly to complete so
so Miriam she invented a she came up
with a set of conditions what you're
looking at here is in a sense the set of
all tripartite graphs so there's one
there's a simpler one here's another
hmm we've again got groups and all of
these within this group these points are
not connected to one another but they
are connected to all other they are
connected to all of the points in the
other groups murder can't so for every
point in here there is a tripartite
graph and she considered this set of all
possible tripartite graphs and she came
up with a set of conditions here's all
the points while all the graphs slash
points that meet condition one here's
all the points that meet condition two
here's all the points that meet
condition three if we take away all
points that don't meet although
conditions here's the set of she would
claim while she proved that if you've
got a set if you've got a point in here
or rather if a graph can be decomposed
into five cycles as this one we know can
then it is definitely in this set of
points so it would not vanish when I'm
doing this but she was unable to prove
though she did reckon that it's
definitely the case that every single
point in this group can definitely be
decomposed she proved that her
conditions that these conditions were
necessary but she didn't know whether
they're sufficient and if you managed to
prove that they are sufficient or that
they aren't sufficient then yeah you can
publish the paper yeah and that brings
us onto the final thing Miriam is a
Carney doodled so much while working
that her daughter thought she was an
artist I find this story tremendously
sweet and it's very interesting so her
work is extremely visual all of this all
of this stuff right she yeah and so she
didn't she used to write equations but
her preferred method of working she'd
had these huge pieces of paper and she'd
just make it so that she could doodle do
doodle you know doodle whatever she
needed to doodle in order to think about
these problems that she was facing and
it's such a pity that when the media
covered her reception her achievement in
winning the award and her death you
really didn't see many visualizations
like that which i think is such a shame
but there you go